**Beginner\'s Frontend Development Roadmap**

*A step-by-step guide for aspiring frontend developers, covering
essential skills from HTML and CSS basics to JavaScript and beyond.*

**What is front end development?**

Imagine you want to buy a toy from an online store. When you visit the
store\'s website, everything you see and interact with is the front end.

![image](https://github.com/gouthampai05/frontendroadmap/assets/171533091/2382ed21-d1e0-44c1-9b3e-1317c4db25de)


The buttons you click, the search bar you use to search products or the
product categories you click on the home screen is developed by a front
end engineer so that it\'s easy for you to look for what you want and
buy it.

[Thus Front end engineering involves creating and developing user
interfaces (UI) to ensure that users find them natural and easy to use
for accomplishing their tasks.]{.underline}

So your job as a Front End Developer is to implement good user
interfaces in a way that the user finds easy and enjoyable to use and
your software project is used in an effective way, serving its purpose.

You can understand the importance of good front end development if you
think about the absolute worst websites or apps you have used. For
example, banking websites generally have a *not-so-good* UI, which makes
it a nightmare to work with. You know the UI is bad when the customers
have to repeatedly call you to ask how to perform a particular task
using their website. So a good front end engineer makes sure their users
don\'t face these issues.

**Yeah I get what front end development is, but how do I technically
implement it?**

The first thing to know about front end development is how these three
technologies work together to make modern web pages.

**The three pillars of frontend web development**

These are the three critical languages in front end development out of
which, only one is a programming language.

![image](https://github.com/gouthampai05/frontendroadmap/assets/171533091/5cbdeede-f15f-4119-b0f0-1cc024c5455c)


HTML and CSS aren't essentially programming languages, they are more of
markup or presentation languages used to specify to the user's browser
on how the UI should be presented to the user.

When you visit a website, the browser first downloads the HTML and CSS
files from the web server. It reads the HTML to build a structure, it
applies the CSS to this structure to style the elements, determining
colors, fonts, and layouts. By combining the structure from HTML and the
styling from CSS, the browser can present a visually formatted webpage
for you to see and interact with.

JavaScript adds interactivity to the webpage. It tells the browser what
actions to perform if the user clicks a button for example.\
It might be a bit confusing right now, but things will start to make
sense as we explore each part/pillar step by step.

To get a better overview of what front end is all about, refer to these
resources:\
Video: [[Frontend web development - a complete
overview]{.underline}](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WG5ikvJ2TKA)\
Article: [[Introduction to front end
development]{.underline}](https://medium.com/@techyJaunt/introduction-to-front-end-development-b685802eef75#:~:text=The%20front%20end's%20focus%20is,ensure%20responsiveness%20on%20different%20devices.)

So now we know that as a front-end developer, your main job is to make
sure that when people use your website or app, it looks good and works
well. To do this, you use three main tools: HTML, CSS, and JavaScript.
It\'s time to dive a bit deeper and understand how each of these
technologies help you achieve your objective.

**Level 1: Markup Languages**

To explain the working of HTML and CSS well, we can consider a classic
example of building a house.

**HTML:**

HTML (which stands for HyperText Markup Language) is a markup language
that tells web browsers how to structure content on a webpage.

What does that mean?

Think of building a house. HTML is like the plan that tells the builders
about where to put each room and door. It sets up the basic structure
for the walls and floors.

![image](https://github.com/gouthampai05/frontendroadmap/assets/171533091/ca2ca170-6295-477f-b22b-25bc4f496f64)

Similarly using HTML, you can create the basic skeleton of your web
page. You can specify heading, buttons, text fields etc based on what
you want to have on your web page.

![image](https://github.com/gouthampai05/frontendroadmap/assets/171533091/c93630c9-839e-4191-b29f-f862145e6682)


The image above is the landing page of Netflix, highlighting what its
skeleton looks like. As you can see it doesn\'t look like their actual
landing page, but there are a few elements that are similar, for example
the text that says "Unlimited movies, TV shows and more". This is the
skeleton of the netflix sign in page. This is implemented using HTML
that specifies what elements are present on the web page. These elements
can then be 'styled' using CSS to make the webpage look like how you
want it to.

**CSS:\
**

CSS, which stands for Cascading Style Sheets, is like the decorator of a
webpage.

It is all about building the look and feel of the web page. It decides
how everything should look, from the colors and fonts to the layout and
spacing. Considering the example of building a house, just like how a
decorator chooses the paint colors and furniture arrangement for a room
to make it look nice, CSS makes sure the webpage looks stylish and
appealing to visitors.

![image](https://github.com/gouthampai05/frontendroadmap/assets/171533091/02781a2f-466b-4bd0-96e0-cfc64d69c1b5)


The above image is the netflix sign in page after we apply styling to
the skeleton of the webpage using CSS.

So to summarize it, HyperText Markup Language (HTML) is used to build
the structure of the webpage by specifying required elements like texts,
buttons etc and Cascading Style Sheet (CSS) is used to specify how each
element like a button should look and what should its position be on a
web page.

HTML and CSS are technically all you need to design the appearance of
the UI, thus they are called markup or presentation languages. There
exist additional tools that help you develop the visuals of the UI
effectively that make your life easier, which we will be exploring
further down the roadmap. For now, its important that you learn and
practice the fundamentals of HTML/CSS since those additional tools are
built on top of these languages.

**So how do we start learning HTML/CSS?**

The top course I highly suggest is CS50W Introduction to Web
Programming. It\'s an incredible course that comprehensively covers all
the essentials for building web applications, including both front-end
and back-end development. Additionally, it delves into vital
technologies like Git, React, and touches on crucial topics such as
scalability, security, and Continuous Integration/Continuous Deployment
(CI/CD).

Course: [[CS50s introduction to web programming with python and
javascript.]{.underline}](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLhQjrBD2T380xvFSUmToMMzERZ3qB5Ueu)

If you want to specifically learn the front end for now, you can just
watch the videos that cover HTML, CSS and Javascript.

Here are some links to other awesome resources if you prefer
alternatives:

-   [[HTML and CSS Tutorial for
    > beginners]{.underline}](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLZPZq0r_RZOOxqHgOzPyCzIl4AJjXbCYt)

-   [[Apna College: HTML tutorial for
    > beginners]{.underline}](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HcOc7P5BMi4)

-   [[Apna College: CSS tutorial for
    > beginners]{.underline}](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ESnrn1kAD4E&list=PLfqMhTWNBTe0PY9xunOzsP5kmYIz2Hu7i&index=2)

**Things to keep in mind: PROOO TIPPPP!**

In the above mentioned CSS tutorial by Apna College or any course in
general, remember that you don\'t always have to finish the whole course
before moving to the next step. In programming, there\'s no such thing
as knowing everything 100%. So, just learn what you need to start your
project. If you feel you need to learn more later on, you can always
come back and learn more.

Programming, just like any other skill, has to be practiced. Courses
will introduce you to the concepts required, but you will have to do
some practice projects to develop a deeper understanding of the
technologies.\
You can do any project you like, or you can select or take inspiration
from one of these:

[[Contact us page using HTML and
CSS]{.underline}](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=orBQesFBkXg&list=PLjwm_8O3suyOwElnplQ3quKEHsOuHyP9R&index=28)

[[Netflix website clone using HTML and
CSS]{.underline}](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Tgat3-prVv4)

[[How to make a website using HTML and
CSS]{.underline}](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-2LtZRi6Q0s)

Do any one of these, or any one of your own guided tutorials which will
give you a good understanding of how HTML and CSS is used to build a
good UI. After a guided tutorial, it is time to challenge yourself by
building a UI on your own.

**Level 2: JavaScript**

After a solid understanding of HTML and CSS, the next step is to learn
JavaScript, which is a proper programming language. But what is
javascript actually used for? Isn\'t HTML and CSS enough to create
websites? Well technically yes, HTML and CSS are enough to create a
website, but javascript is used to add 'interactivity' to your website.
What does this mean?

Instagram is a good example of a website with a lot of interactive
features. When you use instagram and you want to like someone's picture,
you click on the like button or double tap the picture. Then instagram
has to update the like counter and show you that you have liked the
post. If you comment under that post, instagram has to add that comment
to the comment section of the post. So based on your actions, the
instagram website does a particular task(i.e. updating likes or comments
on your screen). This task is programmed using javascript. It is
possible to make basic blog sites for example, using only HTML & CSS.
But imagine instagram without all of its interactive features, it\'s
essentially useless.

Going back to the classic example of building a house: HTML is like the
blueprint or framework of the house, CSS is like the paint and interior
design, and JavaScript is like the switches, fans, and plumbing that add
functionality and make the house work.

You might have requirements for your project that needs such an
interactive UI. Thus it\'s important to be good with JavaScript as a
front end developer.

Thus JavaScript (JS), alongside HTML and CSS, is the magic behind
interactive web pages. This high-level, interpreted language allows web
pages to update content, respond to user actions, and create animations,
all running directly in your browser.

At first, it can be tricky to see how HTML, CSS, and JavaScript work
together. But as you learn and practice each one, it will become much
clearer how they fit and function together.

**So how do we start learning JS?**

Here are some links to awesome resources:

-   [[Javascript tutorial for
    > beginners]{.underline}](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLZPZq0r_RZOO1zkgO4bIdfuLpizCeHYKv)

-   [[Apna College: Javascript full
    > course]{.underline}](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLGjplNEQ1it_oTvuLRNqXfz_v_0pq6unW)

-   [[Learn Javascript with this one
    > project]{.underline}](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=E3XxeE7NF30)

HTML, CSS and JS are the fundamental technologies required to build a
good frontend UI. In the future, this roadmap will introduce you to
other technologies built on top of these fundamental technologies that
are used to make your work easier, like react and tailwind.
